3
2009
BBC National Short Story AwardOther People’s Gods
Naomi Alderman
Mr Bloom led a blameless life until he saw Gane-
sha. Some people do. Some, like Mr Bloom, go
to ophthalmic college at their mother’s insistence
although in their hearts they had yearned to travel to
far-off lands. Some, like him, dream of spice islands
and dusky maidens but settle for Telma stock cubes
and the buxom daughter of the retiring optician, Mr
Lefkowitz. Some, like Mr Bloom, raise a family and
examine rheumy eyes and rub their corns at night
and quite forget in all that piling-up of years that
once they longed to stand bare-chested on a shore
of golden sand, to go where man had never trod, to
love as man had never loved. Some find contentment
there, and others discontent. Mr Bloom, quite to his
own surprise, found Ganesha.16 BBC National Short Story Award 2009
He was on a market stall, among bangles and saris,
joss sticks and wall hangings. There, in the centre,
a porcelain statue of a four-armed man with an el-
ephant’s head, or perhaps an elephant with the body
of a four-armed man. He was bright pink, with large
kind eyes and a golden headdress. One of his hands
was beckoning, another motioning the observer to
stay away. Mr Bloom saw at once that this was a god;
what else could it be, enticing and warning at the
same moment? He picked up the statue, the glaze
smooth beneath his fingertips. The young man tend-
ing the stall, dirty blond dreadlocks falling into his
eyes, said:
‘Careful, Grandpa, yeah? You break it, you pay,
alright?’
Mr Bloom thought of the story of Abraham our
forefather, who condemned his father for avodah zara,
by which is meant foreign worship, by which is meant
idol worship. As a young boy, realising the truth that
there is only one God, Abraham smashed his father’s
idols. When his father punished him, Abraham said,
‘No, father, it wasn’t me, it was the biggest idol. He
took a stick and smashed all the others.’ His father
said, ‘You idiot, idols can’t move!’ and Abraham re-
plied, ‘So why do you worship them, then?’ The story
does not relate whether at that moment Abraham’s
father was enlightened, or whether, on the contrary,				
Other People’s Gods 17
he punished Abraham yet harder for stripping him of
the beliefs which, in prehistoric Mesopotamia, must
have been even more precious than they are today.
Mr Bloom considered all this as he held Ganesha
in his hands. Those eyes were so tender, full of love
for whatever they looked upon. Those arms were so
strong; with him on one’s side how could a person
ever fail? Mr Bloom had never touched an idol be-
fore, never before considered that the sin of avodah
zara could have any practical application. He looked
at the smooth curl of the trunk, mighty yet comfort-
ing.
‘I’ll take him,’ he said.
For a while, Mr Bloom thought he could hide Ga-
nesha. He wrapped the god in plastic bags, cushioned
him with hundreds of soft lens-cleaning cloths, and
tucked him behind the stack of Passover dishes at
the bottom of the wardrobe in the spare room. But
it was no use. Somehow his wife always seemed to
need something from right at the back of that very
wardrobe and he was sent to retrieve it. Or one of
his children would have left the door open. When-
ever Mr Bloom went near the spare room, Ganesha’s
trunk would have worked its way out of its wrapping
and waved at him, bold and pink, from the plastic-bag
swaddling.
He wants to be worshipped, thought Mr Bloom,18 BBC National Short Story Award 2009
and knew at once that it was true, for wasn’t that
always what gods wanted? Love and gifts, or fear and
wars, or sometimes both. But how to worship him?
Mr Bloom was puzzled; he had never worshipped an
idol before, and had not the least idea of the proper
way to do so. He looked in his Bible. ‘Thou shalt not
make for thyself graven images,’ he read. ‘Thou shalt
not bow down to them or worship them.’ Then, later,
God said ‘an altar shalt thou make for me, and sacri-
fice thereon thy burnt offerings, thy sheep and thine
oxen’. Mr Bloom had neither sheep nor oxen, and
did not particularly want to make a burnt offering
of his professional equivalent. He had once melted a
pair of spectacles by mistake and the fumes had been
revolting. But bowing down and worshipping seemed
fairly easy to achieve.
Mr Bloom placed Ganesha on a raffia footstool in
the spare room, taking care to close the door first.
Ganesha seemed happy, the fiery glint in his eye now
one of deep approval. Slowly, mindful of the mild
arthritis in his right knee, Mr Bloom lowered himself
to the floor, then bowed so that his forehead touched
the ground.
‘O Great Ganesha,’ he intoned, in a prayer he had
composed himself, ‘I humbly thank you for gracing
my home with your presence. I pray, O lord Ganesha,
that you will bless all those who dwell here. And I				
Other People’s Gods 19
especially beseech you, all-knowing and most merci-
ful Ganesha, to help my daughter Judy in her law A-
level for, O kind Ganesha, she finds the coursework
very hard to understand. Ohhhhh mighty Ganesha,’
he said, attempting to raise himself up into a kneel-
ing position again, to proceed with his prayer. But
though his spirit longed to give Ganesha due praise,
Mr Bloom’s back was weak. A muscle in his left but-
tock spasmed, he crouched down again and, waiting
for the pain to subside, it was in this position that his
wife found him twenty minutes later.
‘Reuben!’ she said. ‘What in God’s name do you
think you’re doing?’
‘I,’ he said, ‘Sandra, my back, it’s gone again,
bring the Deep Heat!’ He hoped to distract her long
enough to crawl with Ganesha to the wardrobe and
conceal him, but Sandra was more sharp-witted than
that.
‘Reuben!’ she said again, ‘is that an idol? Were you
worshipping an idol in our own home, with me so busy
with the Pesach cleaning and the Rabbi coming for
lunch on Shabbes?’
‘Sandra!’ Mr Bloom replied. ‘How can you say
such a thing?’ For Mr Bloom hadn’t been married for
twenty years without learning a thing or two himself.
‘No,’ he continued, ‘I found this statue on a market
stall and I thought it might suit the colour scheme in20 BBC National Short Story Award 2009
this room.’ Mrs Bloom had nagged him for years to
take a greater interest in such domestic matters. ‘I
was just... examining it when I tripped and fell and
hurt my back.’
‘Hmmm,’ said Sandra.
‘Deep Heat?’ said Mr Bloom. ‘Please, my love?’
Sandra, whose heart was kind although her tongue
was sharp, hurried to the bathroom to fetch the tube
of healing ointment.
In the meantime, Mr Bloom attempted, without a
great deal of success, to replace the statue of Ganesha
in his wrappings, to cover over his flamboyance and
thus cease to distress his wife. But the trunk seemed
unaccountably slippery, and the bubble wrap must
have shrunk a little. When Sandra returned, Ganesha
was still sitting on the floor. She massaged the sooth-
ing cream deep into her husband’s buttock while
staring thoughtfully at the god. At last, her fingers
still menthol-fragrant, she picked up the statue and
examined it critically.
‘Do you know,’ she said, ‘I think it might do for
the living room. On the sideboard. It’s very ethnic.’
And so Ganesha took up residence at the very
centre of the Bloom home. The children objected
naturally, as children always do.
‘Errrr,’ said Judy at breakfast, while munching her
Marmite bagel, ‘I think it’s staring at me.’				
Other People’s Gods 21
‘Yuck,’ said David, flicking Ganesha with his
fingernail as he hoisted his schoolbag. ‘It looks dirty.
I bet it’s infested.’
‘The statue is hollow,’ said Mr Bloom mildly, won-
dering in his heart why God chose to turn delight-
ful babies into charmless teenagers, ‘and his name is
Ganesha.’
David rolled his eyes. Judy sighed. They went to
school. As Mr Bloom was taking the breakfast dishes
into the kitchen he paused for a moment in front of
Ganesha, inclined his head slightly, and left a morsel
of bagel on a saucer in front of him.
Mr Bloom could not help but notice that his
life seemed better with Ganesha in it. When Mrs
Rosenblatt, of the Rosenblatt Dried Fruit empire,
missed her fourth appointment in a row, Mr Bloom
did not tremble at the idea of rebuking her. Instead,
he felt a mastery, a calmness, a purposeful strength.
He picked up the telephone without hesitation and
said:
‘Mrs Rosenblatt, your appointment has now been
rescheduled for half past four. If you are not in my
shop at half past four, Bloom’s Opticians will have no
further need of your custom.’
‘But...’ said Mrs Rosenblatt.
‘No further need,’ he said again.
‘But Mr...’ said Mrs Rosenblatt.22 BBC National Short Story Award 2009
‘Thank you,’ said Mr Bloom, ‘and good day.’
Mrs Rosenblatt appeared, punctual and meek, at
half past four. As Mr Bloom ushered her into his eye-
testing room he muttered a quiet prayer of thanks to
Ganesha.
The rest of the family, too, grew increasingly
fond of the god as the days went on. Ganesha’s gaze
was so magnanimous, he filled the living room
with a sense of quiet peace. Mr Bloom noticed that
Sandra and Judy and David spent longer in that room
now. David took to doing his homework on the table
under the watching eye of Ganesha. And Mr Bloom
noticed that, though Judy was still dismissive and
disdainful of the statue, on the morning before her
module exam she left a badge from her jacket on the
sideboard in front of him. She caught her father’s eye
as she turned to go, shrugged uncomfortably and
said: ‘For luck. You know.’ And when Judy did better
in that examination than in her teachers’ opinions she
had any right to, Ganesha came to be looked on in the
Bloom family home with a certain warmth.
At first, the Blooms did not speak of Ganesha
outside their home. But Hendon is not a place for
secrets. Perhaps it was that Judy’s friend from school,
Mikaella, observed her placing a small handful of
yellow mandel croutons in front of the god be-
fore she started her homework. Perhaps it was that				
Other People’s Gods 23
David’s friend Benjy wondered why David rubbed
the statue’s head before the final round of every Wii
Tennis game. However it happened, soon one person
spoke to another and another to a third and it became
known in Hendon that the Blooms – yes, Bloom’s the
optician, yes, Sandra Bloom of the PTA, yes, that nice
David Bloom whose barmitzvah they’d attended only
two short years before – those very Blooms had an
idol in their house.
Now, it is made very clear in the Bible that the
introduction of idolatry into a good Jewish home
cannot go unchallenged. Were not 3,000 men put
to death for worshipping a golden calf? And was
it not for this very sin of idolatry that Jezebel was
thrown from a window to be devoured by wild
dogs? Of course, Barnet Council would be much
alarmed should such events come to pass in Hendon.
And thus it was that Mr Bloom was not awakened
in the night by a party of eunuchs come to effect his
defenestration, but instead received a telephone call
asking that he should kindly pay a visit to the Rabbi
at his earliest convenience.
The Rabbi was a young man, only recently fin-
ished with his seminary education. Nonetheless, his
beard was neat and his manner suitably deferential to
a man of Mr Bloom’s seniority.
‘Now, aheheh,’ he said, steepling his fingers, ‘I24 BBC National Short Story Award 2009
wanted to talk to you, Mr Bloom, about your, um,
statue.’
‘Oh yes?’ said Mr Bloom. He did not feel per-
turbed. He had found that since Ganesha had
entered his life, he had been less easily disturbed by all
vicissitudes. He felt solid.
‘Yes,’ said the Rabbi. He fiddled with his beard
nervously. ‘The thing is, Mr Bloom, there’s been
talk. That is, there has started to be talk. Not, you
understand, that I listen to talk, no, not at all, but a
man of your position, a trustee of the synagogue, Mr
Bloom...’
‘Talk?’ said Mr Bloom, mildly.
‘About your statue, Mr Bloom. People are talking
about your statue.’ The Rabbi began to speak more
quickly, clearly discomfited by Mr Bloom’s silence.
‘The thing is, Mr Bloom, it doesn’t do for a syna-
gogue trustee to have a... to have a...’
‘A god?’ Mr Bloom volunteered.
‘An idol,’ said the Rabbi. ‘It doesn’t do for some-
one in your position to have an idol in your house. So,
um, get rid of it, please.’
Mr Bloom thought about how his house had
changed since the arrival of Ganesha. It was not,
of course, that the family was unrecognizable. Not
that there was no longer any strife or bitterness.
They continued to argue, to complain; things contin-				
Other People’s Gods 25
ued to go wrong. And yet, the quiet presence of the
elephant-headed god seemed to have strengthened
each of them. Perhaps, thought Mr Bloom, it was his
imagination. And yet he would rather not give the
god up.
‘I think,’ he said, ‘that I would rather not.’
The Rabbi frowned and leaned forward in his
chair, earnest and sincere.
‘Now look here, Mr Bloom,’ he said, ‘we can both
be reasonable about this, can’t we? Of course you
know and I know that you don’t worship the thing. But
can’t you see that it looks all wrong?’
‘But I do,’ said Mr Bloom.
‘Ah,’ said the Rabbi, satisfied, ‘at least you can see
that.’
‘No,’ said Mr Bloom, ‘I mean that I do worship
him.’
And the Rabbi sat back suddenly as if Mr Bloom,
the kindly optician, had struck him in the face.
‘Hmm,’ he said after a long pause, ‘we should talk
more. Perhaps tomorrow?’
On the second day, the Rabbi telephoned in the
afternoon and invited Mr Bloom to come to talk with
him in his study at the synagogue.
‘Mr Bloom,’ said the Rabbi, obviously a little
nervous, ‘I want to talk to you about God.’
Mr Bloom smiled and said, ‘that’s your field,26 BBC National Short Story Award 2009
Rabbi, not mine.’
The Rabbi smiled thinly, ‘Quite, quite. But the
thing is, Mr Bloom, God is really quite specific about
idols. Second commandment, you know. No other
gods before me. Make for yourself no graven image.
It’s really very clear.’
Mr Bloom nodded slowly.
‘I don’t see how you can say that you “worship”
a statue and still keep your place on the synagogue
board, you see, Mr Bloom. I don’t see how we can
keep on letting you attend the synagogue at all.’
Mr Bloom said, mildly, ‘But I still keep the laws. I
still pray to God. I’m still a Jew.’
And the Rabbi spread his hands wide and smiled
nervously and shook his head and said: ‘Ah, but “I the
Lord your God am a jealous God,” you know.’
Mr Bloom thought of Ganesha, his wide, kind
eyes, his welcoming arms. ‘If God is so great,’ he said,
‘why is he jealous? I thought we weren’t supposed to
covet.’
And the Rabbi’s face darkened, and he said: ‘I
can see we will have to talk further about this, Mr
Bloom.’
And on the third day, Mr Bloom received an-
other telephone call. It was in the early morning;
Mr Bloom’s shop was not due to open for another
hour. The Rabbi apologized for calling so early and				
Other People’s Gods
27
said: ‘Mr Bloom. I have thought a great deal about
what you have said. I think I should see the statue for
myself. I wonder if you would be able to bring it
here, to the synagogue, this morning? I think that the
whole matter could be resolved if you would bring
the statue here.’
Mr Bloom agreed that he would do so. He had,
after all, benefited a great deal from the synagogue
and its Rabbis. He was still a Jew. Whatever argu-
ments the Rabbi might wish to muster, he, Bloom,
felt honour-bound to hear out.
Mr Bloom wrapped Ganesha in a soft blanket
and placed him into a sturdy holdall. As he did so, he
caressed the curled trunk reverently. He wondered
if, like the prophet Elisha, the Rabbi intended to
challenge Ganesha to a duel with the Almighty, Lord
of Hosts. He was intrigued to see which god would
prevail.
The Rabbi was waiting for Mr Bloom at the
synagogue gates. The building was old and respect-
able. Constructed in the 1920s, its solid bricks had
housed generations of prayer, of lamentation and of
joyful song. The Rabbi led Mr Bloom through the
corridors of the synagogue, not into the main prayer
hall, but up via a winding cedar-scented staircase to
the choir stalls, perched high above the Holy Closet
in which the scrolls of the Torah reside. From here28 BBC National Short Story Award 2009
they could look across the ranged ranks of seats in
the synagogue, those same seats which filled every
Friday and Saturday with hundreds of Jews, come to
worship the one and only God.
The Rabbi threw the windows at the back of the
choir stalls open, inhaled deeply several times and
then turned to Mr Bloom. ‘Have you brought the
idol?’ he asked. Mr Bloom noticed that the Rabbi,
too, seemed stronger and less nervous.
Mr Bloom nodded.
‘Show him to me,’ said the Rabbi.
Mr Bloom withdrew the god from the holdall,
unwrapped the soft blanket and held him gently. He
thought that perhaps the god was heavier now than
when he had bought him.
The Rabbi’s nose wrinkled in disgust. ‘Do you
not know, Mr Bloom, that this thing was made by
men? That it is only china and paint? How can you
give your worship to something that you could
construct yourself?’
Mr Bloom shrugged. It seemed impossible to
explain if the Rabbi could not understand it. At last,
in an attempt to answer, he said: ‘I followed my heart
and my eyes,’ but thought that this did not explain
one tenth of what he hoped to communicate.
The Rabbi looked at Mr Bloom for a long mo-
ment. Then, with a little smile, he tugged on Mr				
Other People’s Gods
Bloom’s arm and brought him to stand by the
window too. The synagogue is at the top of a rise, and
the whole of Hendon can be seen from its windows,
if one is able to peer through the stained glass.
‘Mr Bloom,’ said the Rabbi, ‘I hope you know that
God loves you.’
Bloom nodded silently. He gazed upon the con-
templative and peaceful face of Ganesha.
‘I have never encountered a case such as this,’ said
the Rabbi. ‘I had to consult with the most senior au-
thorities for a ruling.’
Bloom nodded again.
‘They were of one mind. You must understand,
Mr Bloom, that this is for your own good,’ said the
Rabbi. Then, in one fluid motion, too quickly for Mr
Bloom to react, the Rabbi grabbed Ganesha from Mr
Bloom’s hands. He held him for a moment, clutch-
ing the god close to his body in an almost protective
gesture and then hurled him in a wide arc through
the synagogue window. With a crisply crunching
report, Ganesha smashed into a thousand pieces on
the paved area below.
‘Now, Mr Bloom,’ said the Rabbi beaming, ‘don’t
you feel better, rid of that revolting thing?’
Bloom said nothing. He stared down at the paved
courtyard of the synagogue, where bright pink and
gold fragments radiated from the central point of30 BBC National Short Story Award 2009
impact. At length, he allowed the Rabbi to lead him
away from the window and back to his own home.
Late that night, Mr Bloom – who had been syn-
agogue treasurer for many years and remained a
keyholder of the building – silently let himself in
through the iron gate of the courtyard. He had
brought a fine-haired clothesbrush and a carved
wooden box from his living room, along with a bag
slung over his shoulder containing one or two other,
heavier items. Slowly, working in circles, he brushed
the dust of Ganesha into the box and, when he was
finished, dug a small hole in one of the ornamental
flower beds and buried it. He wondered if he should
say a few words over the grave, but could think of
none that might be appropriate.
Then, still moving without sound, he opened
the door to the main building of the synagogue and
slipped through. He had rarely been in this vaulted
space alone at night, and never without a specific and
necessary errand. He paused now, thinking of the
many hours of quiet contemplation this place had
afforded him, of the services he had heard intoned
here, of the comradely chats, the bustling ceremo-
nial, the joyful celebrations and the sombre days.
The next morning, the synagogue officials were
startled to find the building not only locked but				
Other People’s Gods 31
its locks stuffed with wax. Fearing the worst, they
called a locksmith who, after some effort, man-
aged to remove the locks bodily from the doors. The
officials – and, by now, a small crowd who had heard
that something might be going on at the synagogue –
entered and looked around with horror.
The synagogue was ruined. The benches were
smashed, the drapery torn, the candlesticks twist-
ed, the windows broken. And in the centre was
Mr Bloom, standing with an axe by his side and
perspiration soaking through his clothes.
And they said, ‘Why have you done this thing?’
And he said, ‘I? I? I did not do this. This was done
by the Almighty.’
And they looked around again at the benches with
the axe-shaped cuts deeply incised into them, and at
the places where the upholstery had been ripped out
in quantities the size of a man’s hand.
And they said, ‘God did not do this! God cannot
destroy in this way.’
And he said, ‘Then why do you worship Him?’
But it is not recorded whether the people were
grateful for this enlightenment.
